Editorial for Grid mst (#3857)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/5_Plat/Sweep_Line.mdx

<FocusProblem problem="manSam" />

The key observation is that although there are many points, they are spread across a small surface i.e. $0 \leq x, y \leq 1000$. So instead of using Kruskal's or Prim's
algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's. Starting from an arbitrary point, from the first one in the code below, run Dijkstra algorithm. The priority queue

> will sort the points after the distance to the MST.

Author: Done

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Author: The Dijkstra's will always  run in $\mathcal{O}(1000 ^ 2)$ because it visits the hole grid

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Author: It's more like a BFS than Dijkstra

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Author: N it's just the number of points , not the grid size.
![image](https://github.com/cpinitiative/usaco-guide/assets/59292725/48b17c9f-3600-44db-89c1-cee3388168df)

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Reviewer: ngl still kinda misleading
maybe use a variable for the size of the grid

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Reviewer 2: was this fixed?

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Author: yes

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Reviewer: can you put the complexity in terms of nmax

wait maybe don't use NMAX as the name
MAX_GRID_SIZE would be better to avoid name conflicts

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Author: Ok done. `NMAX` was chaged to `MAX_GRID_SIZE`

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Reviewer: > can you put the complexity in terms of nmax

> *Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

Reviewer: do this and i'll merge

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

> const int NMAX = 1001;

Author: Ok

const int dx[4] = {-1, 0, 1, 0};
const int dy[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

int d[NMAX][NMAX];
bool mat[NMAX][NMAX];  // mat[x][y] = if (x, y) point is in the input

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	memset(d, -1, sizeof(d));
	priority_queue<pair<int, pair<int, int>>> pq;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		int x, y;
		cin >> x >> y;
		mat[x][y] = 1;
		if (!i) {
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});
		}
	}

	auto inside = [](int x, int y) {
		return 0 <= x && 0 <= y && x <= 1000 && y <= 1000;
	};

	// Dijkstra algorithm
	int ans = 0;
	while (!pq.empty()) {
		int x = pq.top().second.first;
		int y = pq.top().second.second;
		int dist = -pq.top().first;
		pq.pop();

		if (dist != d[x][y]) continue;
		if (mat[x][y]) {
			mat[x][y] = 0;
			ans += dist;
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});

> 			if (dist) continue;

Reviewer 2: braces?

Author: Done

<FocusProblem problem="manSam" />

> The key observation is that although there are many points, they are spread across a small surface i.e. $0 \le x, y \le 1000$. So instead of using  Kruskal's or Prim's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key observation is that although there are many points, they are spread across a small surface i.e. $0 \leq x, y \le 1000$. So instead of using Kruskal's or Prim's
```

Author: Done

> algorithm, we can use a Dijkstra approach style. Starting from an arbitrary point, from the first one in the code below, run Dijkstra algorithm. The priority queue
> will sort the points after the distance to the MST.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's. Starting from an arbitrary point, from the first one in the code below, run Dijkstra algorithm. The priority queue
will sort the points after the distance to the MST.
```

Author: Done

*Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

> const int NMAX = 1003;

Reviewer 2: make 1000/1 if not used

Author: Alright

const int dx[4] = {-1, 0, 1, 0};
const int dy[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

int d[NMAX][NMAX];

> bool mat[NMAX][NMAX];  // True if (x,y) point is in the input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bool mat[NMAX][NMAX];  // mat[x][y] = if (x,y) point is in the input
```

Author: Done

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	memset(d, -1, sizeof(d));
	priority_queue<pair<int, pair<int, int>>> pq;
	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		int x, y;

> 		scanf("%d %d", &x, &y);

Reviewer 2: would prefer `cin`, but it's totally fine if you want to keep it.

Author: Done

		mat[x][y] = 1;
		if (!i) {
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});
		}
	}

	auto inside = [](int x, int y) {
		return 0 <= x && 0 <= y && x <= 1000 && y <= 1000;
	};

	// Dijkstra algorithm
	int ans = 0;
	while (!pq.empty()) {
		int x = pq.top().second.first;
		int y = pq.top().second.second;

> 		int dist = -pq.top().first;

Reviewer 2: could you just create a reverse-order priority queue instead of doing negation?

Author: Ok Done

		pq.pop();

		if (dist != d[x][y]) continue;
		if (mat[x][y]) {
			mat[x][y] = 0;
			ans += dist;
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});
			if (dist) continue;
		}

		for (int dir = 0; dir < 4; dir++) {
			int newx = x + dx[dir];
			int newy = y + dy[dir];
			if (inside(newx, newy) &&

> 			    (d[newx][newy] == -1 || dist + 1 < d[newx][newy])) {

Reviewer 2: add a comment for this ?

Author: Ok

				d[newx][newy] = dist + 1;
				pq.push({-d[newx][newy], {newx, newy}});
			}
		}
	}
	cout << ans << '\n';

> 
> 	return 0;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done

<FocusProblem problem="manSam" />

> The key observation is that although there are many points, they are spread across a small surface i.e. $0 \leq x, y \le 1000$. So instead of using Kruskal's or Prim's

Reviewer 3: Grammar

Reviewer 3: You can't start a sentence with "So"

Reviewer: idt that matters 💀

> algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's. Starting from an arbitrary point, from the first one in the code below, run Dijkstra's algorithm. The priority queue

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's. Starting from an arbitrary point, run Dijkstra's algorithm with the priority queue
```

Author: Done.

> will sort the points after the distance to the MST.

Reviewer 3: what does this mean

Author: I thought it could help the reasoning

*Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

const int NMAX = 1000;
const int dx[4] = {-1, 0, 1, 0};
const int dy[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

> int d[NMAX][NMAX];

Reviewer: what's this array

Author: The distance

Author: I added a comment

int d[NMAX][NMAX];
bool mat[NMAX][NMAX];  // mat[x][y] = if (x, y) point is in the input

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	memset(d, -1, sizeof(d));
	priority_queue<pair<int, pair<int, int>>, vector<pair<int, pair<int, int>>>,
	               greater<pair<int, pair<int, int>>>>

> 	    pq;

Reviewer 2: formatting kinda off ?

Reviewer: i think it's just the autoformatter being dumb

Author: yep it's the autoformatter

Author: Chaged

	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		int x, y;
		cin >> x >> y;
		mat[x][y] = 1;
		if (!i) {
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});
		}
	}

	auto inside = [](int x, int y) {

> 		return 0 <= x && 0 <= y && x <= 1000 && y <= 1000;

Reviewer 2: whyd you define magic numbers but not use them 😭

Author: Ok done.

<FocusProblem problem="manSam" />

The key observation is that although there are many points, they're spread across a pretty small surface.
Because of this, instead of using Kruskal's or Prim's algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's.
Starting from an arbitrary point, we run Dijkstra's algorithm with a priority queue that will sort the points by their distance to the MST.

*Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(S^2)$, where S is the grid size

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

const int GRID_SZ = 1000;
const int dx[4] = {-1, 0, 1, 0};
const int dy[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

int d[GRID_SZ][GRID_SZ];     // The distance from the starting point
bool mat[GRID_SZ][GRID_SZ];  // mat[x][y] = if (x, y) point is in the input

int main() {
	int n;
	cin >> n;
	memset(d, -1, sizeof(d));
	priority_queue<pair<int, pair<int, int>>, vector<pair<int, pair<int, int>>>,
	               greater<pair<int, pair<int, int>>>>
	    pq;

	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		int x, y;
		cin >> x >> y;
		mat[x][y] = 1;
		if (i != 0) {
			d[x][y] = 0;
			pq.push({0, {x, y}});
		}
	}

	auto inside = [&](int x, int y) {

> 		return 0 <= x && 0 <= y && x <= NMAX && y <= NMAX;

Reviewer: did you test the code?

<FocusProblem problem="manSam" />

The key observation is that although there are many points, they are spread across a small surface i.e. $0 \leq x, y \le 1000$, so instead of using Kruskal's or Prim's
algorithm, we can use Dijkstra's. Starting from an arbitrary point, run Dijkstra's algorithm with the priority queue that will sort the points after the distance to the MST.

*Time Complexity:* $\mathcal{O}(1)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

const int MAX_GRID_SIZE = 1000;
const int dx[4] = {-1, 0, 1, 0};
const int dy[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

int d[NMAX][NMAX];     // The distance from the starting point

> bool mat[NMAX][NMAX];  // mat[x][y] = if (x, y) point is in the input

Author: Oh ok. You've changed it
